in this video let us discuss the basic operations on
an array and why the linked list is preferred over array
For example let us take this age array of 10
integer
Now suppose we need to store one more students
age
Is it possible to resize the array at a time It's
not possible
Once we declare and initialised we cannot change the arrays
size at runtime
If we try to access the element at index ten
it will throw the array out of bounds exception
Now let us understand how this nature affects the insertion
and deletion operations in an array so
let us an insert element in an array
Let us take this array of size five and we
want to insert the new element 100 at position two
in the case of C or C plus
Plus we can simply shift the elements from index 2
to 4 to one position right and we can insert
the new Element 100 at Index two in the same
array
But as we discussed in Java we cannot change the
array size at run time
So in order to insert the new element we must
create the new array with N plus one size that
is size of six and we need to apply the
insert logic in the new array in the new array
First Copy the array elements from Index 0 to
given position minus one that is 0 1 and then insert
the new Element 100 at the given position two and
finally copy the remaining elements from index position plus
one to the end of the array
So whenever we need to insert new Element at run
time we need to create the new array with the
required size and copy the existing elements
But this is not an efficient approach as it consumes
both time and space
Similarly if we want to remove an element from an
array we need to create the new size with size
minus one and apply the remove operation
For example that is take this array with size five
and suppose we want to remove the element from Position
three
We need to create a new array of its size
minus one that is four and copy all the elements
except the element which needs to be removed
That is first copy elements from Index zero to position
minus one that is 0 to 2 and then skip
Element 40 and then copy the remaining elements from
position plus one till the end of the array like we discussed
in inserting the element
This is also not an efficient way to remove the
element at run time because to remove the element we need
to create a new array with size minus one and
apply the removing logic
So if we use array we can't grow or shrink its
size at runtime
So what will be the better solution for this The
solution is using a linked list
Unlike an array in the Linked List we won't store
all the elements in contiguous locations
Every element will be stored in different locations and each
of them will be logically linked using its memory address
So in the linked list every node has two parts
Want to store the data and another one to store
the next nodes memory address
For example let us take this linked list with elements
10 20 and 30 here node ten's
Next part points to node twenties memory address and node
20 next part points to node thirties memory address and
node thirties
Next is null
That means Node
30 is the last node of the linked list
We will discuss the linked list elaborately from the next
videos
So here if we want to insert an element 100
after 20 we don't need to create a new linked
list and copy
It's elements like we did in array we can simply set
node with Element 20 pointing to new node and new
node pointing to node with 30
Similarly if we want to delete Element 20 we can
simply make the first node point to the third node
instead of the second node
So we will get the new linked list like this
because of this reason the linked list is preferred over
the data structures in array
Whenever we want to grow or shrink its size we
need to create a new array and do the operations
But we can grow or shrink the linked list based
on our need by just changing the memory
Address from the next video we will discuss about
linked list and how to add or delete nodes from it with examples.